
--- Page 1 ---
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
AI Transformation Is a
Workforce
Transformation
By Julie Bedard and Vinciane Beauchene
ARTICLE FEBRUARY 04, 2026 5 MIN READ
In BCG’s recent Build for the Future x AI 2025 Global Study, which asks C-level executives to gauge
companies’ AI maturity, only about 5% of organizations have managed to reap substantial
financial gains from AI (defined as increases to revenue or cash flow, along with significant
process and workflow improvements). Crucially, that segment also shows stronger financial
performance overall and three-year total shareholder returns that are roughly four times higher,
on average, than AI laggards.
©2026 Boston Consulting Group 1
--- Page 2 ---
What separates these “future-built” companies? They realize that value doesn’t just come from
the technology but from how they empower their people to capitalize on it. In BCG’s case work
involving hundreds of companies, about 10% of value from AI comes from the algorithms
themselves and another 20% comes from the technology required to implement them. The
remaining 70% comes from rethinking the people component. Our analysis shows that future-
built companies plan to upskill more than 50% of employees on AI—compared with 20% for
laggards—and they are putting the organizational resources in place to support those goals. Not
only that, they are four times more likely to have structured AI-learning programs and to carve out
protected time for employees to learn. (See “Most AI Value Comes from People.”)
Most AI Value Comes from People
In our 10-20-70 breakdown of value from AI, the 70% that comes from workforce
changes warrants a closer look. Here’s what’s included in that component:
Secure strategic alignment from the top. First, companies need strong
leadership and governance over the technology, ensuring that AI efforts are in
service of enterprise priorities, not walled off as a separate “AI transformation.”
Leaders should align on a small number of central priorities—typically three to
four—rather than spreading their efforts across dozens or hundreds of use cases.
Dedicated governance and transformation capabilities, built around clear
success metrics and KPIs, ensure that the change program happens on time and
on budget, leading to real, measurable value.
Spur adoption and behavioral changes. To get employees to embrace AI and
change their daily working behaviors, companies should build a holistic change
plan, starting with an inspiring narrative about how the technology will help the
company improve its performance and better meet its objectives. Strong
governance and guardrails around AI can build trust across the workforce.
Companies should invest in upskilling measures to increase fluency to foster at-
scale adoption. And, critically, employees should understand the objective to
move beyond initial experimentation and create real change.
Assess the impact on the workforce. Leaders should determine how the
workforce will be impacted by AI—at the level of positions, employees, and skills
—and identify any gaps. To close those gaps, companies can launch structured
upskilling and reskilling initiatives, along with programs aimed at recruiting and
retaining leaders and employees who already have target capabilities.
Develop an AI-enhanced operating model. Last, companies need to define an
operating model that combines human employees and AI, including roles,
©2026 Boston Consulting Group 2
--- Page 3 ---
governance, and organizational design. That entails redesigning workflows and
new ways of working to capitalize on AI.
Get Leaders and Managers
Involved
Successful strategy starts with alignment from the top. Executive engagement is one of the
strongest predictors of AI maturity. Companies that treat AI as a CEO-level priority—rather than
just a tech initiative—scale faster and generate more value.
Employees in future-built companies see AI not as
something mandated from corporate
headquarters but as something their direct
managers are using every day.
Leaders need to set the overall vision and communicate consistently the “why” to the workforce
with a narrative designed to inspire, so that people at all levels understand the rationale for
implementing AI, how it will improve company performance, and what their role is in that change.
Vision then needs to be translated into action. Among the future-built companies in our research,
88% of managers who role model AI use and actively incorporate it into decision making and daily
operations—versus 25% at AI laggards. (See the exhibit.) Employees in these organizations see AI
not as something mandated from corporate headquarters but as something their direct managers
are using every day.
©2026 Boston Consulting Group 3
--- Page 4 ---
Anticipate the Skills Impacts of AI
and Future Talent Needs
The transformative effect AI will have on the workforce is well documented. Routine tasks within
many roles will become automated, changing the nature of many entry-level positions. This shift
will require companies to create innovative career paths and apprenticeship models for new
graduates, who will be increasingly needed to manage AI-enabled systems. Overall, workplaces
will evolve, creating new opportunities through effective human-AI partnerships.
Fundamental change such as this requires careful forethought and planning, not least because
technology moves quickly while human behavior change takes time. In our data, future-built
companies are five times more likely to do strategic workforce planning than laggards. They
anticipate talent requirements and reshape job architectures and organizational structures with
AI at the core. This planning phase is crucial for understanding where to focus investment to
ensure that any upskilling of existing full-time employees is successful.
©2026 Boston Consulting Group 4
--- Page 5 ---
Fundamental change such as this requires careful
forethought and planning, not least because
technology moves quickly while human behavior
change takes time.
Adopt a Holistic Upskilling
Approach
Foundational skills such as prompt writing and AI literacy are an important investment for firms
looking to upskill their full-time employees. Beyond that, it is crucial to develop the core skills,
such as contextual judgment, framing problems, and interpreting results, that enable workers to
realize the full value of new AI tools across entire workflows and at a systems level.
Giving workers these critical AI skills at scale happens when three elements are in place:
The learning is embedded into daily work. Rather than once-a-year workshops and scenario-
based exercises, employees learn best when new skills are integrated into the flow of work—
when they use real tools to accomplish real tasks, and they receive real feedback. This
reinforces both AI-related competencies and core “human” skills such as problem solving,
communication, collaboration, and creativity.
The design is grounded in behavioral science. People need to see leaders modeling change,
understand the why, and experience wins early.
Robust tracking is in place. Measuring the effectiveness of upskilling initiatives ensures that
programs remain aligned with strategic priorities. Metrics should assess not only the
acquisition of AI-related skills but also progress in developing the new core competencies
that are vital to future roles. Regular assessment allows companies to demonstrate tangible
returns on investment and adapt training initiatives as organizational needs evolve.
When you get all the elements right, upskilling becomes more than a learning initiative. It
becomes part of how the company evolves. And by prioritizing the workforce, companies can give
their people the skills and confidence to embrace the technology and change how they work—
and how the company ultimately creates value.
©2026 Boston Consulting Group 5
--- Page 6 ---
Authors
Vinciane
Julie Bedard
Beauchene
Managing Director & Partner;
BCG Henderson Institute Fellow
Managing Director & Partner
Boston
Paris
ABOUT BOSTON CONSULTING GROUP
Boston Consulting Group partners with leaders in business and society to tackle their most
important challenges and capture their greatest opportunities. BCG was the pioneer in business
strategy when it was founded in 1963. Today, we work closely with clients to embrace a
transformational approach aimed at benefiting all stakeholders—empowering organizations to
grow, build sustainable competitive advantage, and drive positive societal impact.
Our diverse, global teams bring deep industry and functional expertise and a range of
perspectives that question the status quo and spark change. BCG delivers solutions through
leading-edge management consulting, technology and design, and corporate and digital ventures.
We work in a uniquely collaborative model across the firm and throughout all levels of the client
organization, fueled by the goal of helping our clients thrive and enabling them to make the world
a better place.
© Boston Consulting Group 2026. All rights reserved.
For information or permission to reprint, please contact BCG at permissions@bcg.com. To find the
latest BCG content and register to receive e-alerts on this topic or others, please visit bcg.com.
Follow Boston Consulting Group on Facebook and X (formerly Twitter).
©2026 Boston Consulting Group 6